hi everyone welcome to signals and systems course
in this video I am going to explain fourier series representation of discrete time periodic signals
there are many similarities between continuous time and discrete time fourier series
however there are also many differences
as you might remember fourier series representation of continuous time periodic signals consists of linear combination of harmonically related complex exponentials
the formulation is given here
note that it is an infinite series because we are summing up infinite number of terms
however fourier series representation of discrete time periodic signals is a finite series
I am going to show how we obtain this representation in upcoming slides
the infinite series representation leads to some converge issues
we have discussed the convergence issues of continuous time fourier series and when a signal can or can not be represented with fourier series in the previous lectures
since discrete time fourier series is a finite series there are no convergence issues
the discrete time fourier series representation will also lead to periodic coefficients
note that the coefficients are not periodic in continuous time fourier series
a discrete time signal is periodic with period n if if it satisfies the above equation
here fundamental period is the smallest positive integer n that satisfies the given equation and the fundamental frequency is computed as two pi over n
if there is a complex exponential which is periodic with period n
the set of all discrete time complex exponential signals periodic with period n is given below as phi sub k
all of these signals have fundamental frequencies that are multiples of two pi over n and they are harmonically related complex exponentials
note that there are only n distinct signals in the given set
this is because of the fact that discrete time complex exponentials which differ by a factor of two pi are identical
using the same fact we can show that phi sub k and phi sub k plus n are identical signals
the proof is given below
we can write down a general continuous time signal as the linear combination of harmonically related complex exponentials as given here
since there are only n distinct harmonically related signals we can write down the summation for n successive values of k
this representation is referred to as discrete time fourier series and a sub k's are fourier series coefficients
note that this is a finite series composed of n terms and x of n is periodic with period n
so how can we compute the discrete time fourier series coefficients
fourier series coefficients are computed as given in the second equation which is called the synthesis equation
note that fourier series representation is called the analysis equation
I want you to derive the synthesis equation from the analysis equation using the given hints below
ok we know that we can compute the discrete time fourier series coefficients using the synthesis equation
here it is important to note that there are only n fourier series coefficients that need to be computed and the range for k can be any set of n consecutive integers
as a result of that discrete time fourier series coefficients a sub k's are periodic with n
while discussing convergence issues of continuous time fourier series we observed that as we increase the number of terms in a finite summation
fourier series representation converges to the original signal
however gibbs phenomenon occurs at the discontinuity points of the signal
any discrete time periodic signal is completely specified by a finite number of parameters so that there are no convergence issues and there is no gibbs phenomenon
let's move on to the properties of discrete time fourier series
this table summarizes the properties
the derivations of many of these properties are very similar to their continuous time counterparts
here I will only explain some important properties that are different than their continuous time counterparts
the first one is the multiplication property
let's denote a sub k as fourier series coefficient of the discrete time periodic signal x of n
and b sub k as fourier series coefficient of the discrete time periodic signal y of n
if we multiply these two signals fourier series coefficients of the multiplied signal is computed as given in the below equation
we refer to this type of operation as periodic convolution where the summation can be taken over any set of n consecutive values
first difference property is the discrete time parallel to the differentiation property of the continuous time fourier series
if a sub k is fourier series coefficient of the discrete time periodic signal x of n
the fourier series coefficients corresponding to the first difference of x of n are computed as given below
this equation can be obtained easily from time shifting and linearity properties
the parseval relation for discrete time periodic signals is given here
note that the left hand side of this equation is the average power in one period for periodic signal x of n
at the right hand side is the average power in all of its harmonic components
as a result parseval's relation states that the average power in a periodic signal equals the sum of the average powers in all of its harmonic components
in this video I have explained fourier series representation of discrete time periodic signals and the properties of discrete time fourier series
let me know if you have any questions
thank you